\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename doc/ada-ts-mode.info
@settitle Ada Major Mode using Tree-Sitter
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Ada Tree-Sitter Mode: (ada-ts-mode). Ada Major Mode using Tree-Sitter.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Ada Major Mode using Tree-Sitter
@author Troy Brown
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Ada Major Mode using Tree-Sitter

A major mode for Ada files, which utilizes the Emacs built-in support
for tree-sitter, first available starting with Emacs 29.  The
tree-sitter functionality is used to build an in-memory concrete
syntax tree of the parsed language, allowing operations such as syntax
highlighting to be performed more accurately than historical methods
(e.g., regular expressions).

This major mode provides support for syntax highlighting, indentation,
navigation, Imenu, ``which function'' (i.e., displaying the current
function name in the mode line), outlining (via @samp{outline-minor-mode})
and casing.

@strong{Note}: This major mode is based on the Emacs 29 (or newer) built-in
tree-sitter support, not to be confused with the separate Emacs
tree-sitter package.  The two are not compatible with each other.

@strong{Note}: Outlining is made available through Emacs 30 (or newer) built-in
support for outlining within tree-sitter major modes, therefore it is
required for @samp{outline-minor-mode} to work with @samp{ada-ts-mode}.


@end ifnottex

@menu
* Prerequisites::
* Installation::
* Grammar Installation::
* Syntax Highlighting::
* Indentation::
* Navigation::
* Imenu::
* Casing::
* Ada Language Server::
* Miscellaneous::
* LSP Client Support::
* Troubleshooting::
* Example Configuration::
* Resources::
* Command & Function Index::
* Variable Index::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* From the MELPA Package Archive::
* From the Git Repository::

Indentation

* Ada Language Server Indentation::

Troubleshooting

* Org Mode Source Code Blocks::
* Function Calls not Highlighted Correctly::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Prerequisites
@chapter Prerequisites

There are a couple of requirements which must be met in order to use
tree-sitter powered major modes.  The Emacs documentation should be
consulted which will provide complete details.  The following are the
main points to consider:

@itemize
@item
Emacs must have been built with tree-sitter support.  Versions of
Emacs prior to Emacs 29 do not have built-in support.  The built-in
support is optionally enabled when Emacs is built.  It is almost
guaranteed that any pre-built Emacs 29 or newer executable supplied
as part of an OS package manager (e.g., APT, Homebrew, MSYS2, etc.)
will have been built with this capability enabled.
@item
The tree-sitter shared library must be installed on your system.
The specifics of how to do this will vary based on the Operating
System.  However, a pre-built Emacs 29 or newer executable that is
installed by the OS package manager will likely have identified this
library as a prerequisite and have installed it along with Emacs.
Therefore, it is unlikely you will need to manually install this
library if you installed Emacs with an OS package manager.

The following command can be used to determine if tree-sitter
support is enabled in Emacs and whether the tree-sitter library can
be found on your system:
@itemize
@item
@samp{M-: (treesit-available-p) RET}
@item
Make sure it indicates @code{t} in the echo area instead of @code{nil}.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

There are multiple ways in which a package can be installed in Emacs.
The most convenient way is to use a package archive, however
installation directly from the git repository is also possible.  In
addition, there are multiple third party package managers available,
but installation instructions in this section will focus only on the
built-in package manager (i.e., @samp{package.el}).  It is assumed that
power-users will not need direction as to how to use other package
managers.

In addition to package management, it is also common practice to
perform package configuration.  There are also multiple third party
packages for managing your package configuration, however @samp{use-package}
is now built-in to Emacs.  Refer to the example configuration section
for ideas on how to utilize @samp{use-package} to setup your own personal
configuration.

@menu
* From the MELPA Package Archive::
* From the Git Repository::
@end menu

@node From the MELPA Package Archive
@section From the MELPA Package Archive

This package can be installed from the MELPA package archive using the
Emacs built-in package manager (i.e., @samp{package.el}).  MELPA is not
configured in the package manager by default, but the following can be
used to configure the use of the MELPA archive.  Refer to @uref{https://melpa.org/#/getting-started, Getting
Started} for additional details on configuring and using the MELPA
package archive.

@lisp
(add-to-list 'package-archives '("melpa" . "https://melpa.org/packages/") t)
@end lisp

Once configured as above, instruct the package manager to refresh the
available packages and to perform the installation, as follows:

@itemize
@item
@samp{M-x package-refresh-contents RET}
@item
@samp{M-x package-install RET ada-ts-mode RET}
@end itemize

@node From the Git Repository
@section From the Git Repository

Installation directly from the source repository is possible using
@code{package-vc-install}.  The following command can be used to perform this
installation:

@samp{M-x package-vc-install RET https://github.com/brownts/ada-ts-mode RET}

@node Grammar Installation
@chapter Grammar Installation

In order for ada-ts-mode to be useful, it needs to have the specific
tree-sitter Ada language grammar library installed.  This library is
different from the tree-sitter library mentioned in the prerequisites
section (e.g., @samp{libtree-sitter.so} vs @samp{libtree-sitter-ada.so}).  The
library is not bundled with ada-ts-mode, but is maintained separately.
With the default configuration, the first time ada-ts-mode is loaded
(in the absence of an existing installed library) it will prompt to
download, build and install the grammar library.  The following
settings provide control over this activity.

@defopt ada-ts-mode-grammar
Location of the tree-sitter Ada language grammar to be used by
ada-ts-mode.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-grammar-install
Controls the level of automation in installing the grammar library
(automatic, prompt first, etc).
@end defopt

In order to build the library, you will need to have a C compiler
installed.  Refer to the Emacs documentation surrounding
@code{treesit-install-language-grammar}, as ada-ts-mode uses the built-in
Emacs functionality to perform the download, building and installation
of the library.

It's also possible to skip this step if you already have a pre-built
library for the language.  In which case, placing the pre-built
library in the correct location will allow ada-ts-mode to find and use
the library.  You can customize @code{treesit-extra-load-path} to add extra
locations to search for libraries.

You will only be prompted if the library can't be found in one of the
expected locations.  The prompting can also be controlled by changing
the @code{ada-ts-mode-grammar-install} setting.

If manually installing, or troubleshooting the installation of the Ada
language grammar, you can use the following to check whether Emacs can
locate the library:
@itemize
@item
@samp{M-: (treesit-ready-p 'ada t) RET}
@item
Make sure it indicates @code{t} in the echo area instead of @code{nil}.
@end itemize

@node Syntax Highlighting
@chapter Syntax Highlighting

There are 4 different levels of syntax highlighting available,
providing an increasing amount of highlighting.  By default in Emacs,
level 3 (controlled by @code{treesit-font-lock-level}) is used to provide a
compromise between providing too little and too much fontification.
It should be noted that the levels are cumulative, meaning that each
level also includes all of the fontification in the levels below it.
The following provides the list of features and how they are mapped to
the different font lock levels.

@table @asis
@item Level 1
comment, definition
@item Level 2
keyword, preprocessor, string, type
@item Level 3
attribute, assignment, constant, control, function,
number, operator
@item Level 4
bracket, delimiter, error, label
@end table

@node Indentation
@chapter Indentation

Indentation follows the nesting structure of the language. Each nested
level is indented a fixed amount. Thus the general indentation offset
governs the amount of this indentation. Additional configurations
address special cases, such as the indentation of a construct spanning
multiple lines (i.e., broken indent).

Multiple indentation back-ends are supported, but the default back-end
uses the intrinsic tree-sitter support.  Additionally, an external
indentation back-end using the Ada Language Server can be configured,
which uses the Language Server to perform formatting.  In addition to
configuring the indentation backed to use the LSP formatter, a
Language Server client must be enabled in the buffer.

Additionally, the LSP formatter does not use all of the user options
below, it will only use the basic indentation offset and possibly the
broken offset configuration.  Furthermore, because the LSP back-end
uses a formatter rather than an indentation engine, depending on the
configuration of the formatter, the back-end is likely to indent more
than the current line.  See the documentation for the Language Server
to learn about formatter details.

The following user options can be customized to modify the indentation
as needed.

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-backend
Selects the back-end used to provide indentation support.  The
default uses Tree-sitter based indentation and supports all of the
indentation options specified below.  The ``LSP'' setting will use the
Language Server indentation support when a LSP client is active for
the buffer.  If no LSP client is active, or if the LSP formatter
refuses to format (e.g., when syntax errors are present) this falls
back to using Tree-sitter based indentation.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-offset
Indentation used for structural visualization.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-when-offset
Indentation for case alternatives, relative to a case statement.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-broken-offset
Continuation indentation when item does not completely reside on a
single line.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-exp-item-offset
Continuation indentation for partial expressions.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-subprogram-is-offset
Indentation for @samp{is} keyword in a short form subprogram body (i.e.,
null procedure, expression function and abstract subprogram).
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-record-offset
Indentation of a record definition relative to the start of the type
declaration or representation clause when the @samp{record} keyword appears
on a separate line.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-label-offset
Indentation for a block or loop statement containing a label.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-indent-strategy
Indentation strategy to use, typically when @samp{RET} or @samp{TAB} are pressed
during editing.  Historically, pressing one of these keys would
drive a line-based indentation, however more complex indentation
strategies can be used due to the available of the syntax tree.  By
default, an ``aggressive'' indentation strategy is used that attempts
to perform indentation at a higher structural level (e.g.,
statement, subprogram, etc.) in order to correct possible incorrect
indentation that might have occurred while syntax errors were
present in the buffer.  The ``line'' indentation strategy performs the
historical behavior of only indenting the current line.

@strong{Note}: This option is only supported when the tree-sitter indentation
is configured as the back-end.  The reason is to avoid conflicting
with formatting that the LSP formatter might perform.
@end defopt

It should be noted that the offsets defined above are described in
terms of each other, so that by customizing the standard indentation
offset @code{ada-ts-mode-indent-offset}, the other indentation offsets will
be adjusted accordingly.  In other words, those settings either use
the same value or a value derived from it.  Therefore, customizing the
base value will have an affect on the remaining values as well.  If
this is not the desired outcome, the other offsets should be
customized as well.

Indentation rules used in @code{ada-ts-mode}, as in all tree-sitter based
modes, are based on the syntax of the language.  When what currently
exists in the buffer is not syntactically correct, the in-memory
syntax tree will contain errors, since the buffer doesn't adhere to
the grammar rules of the language (i.e., it contains syntax errors).
To help combat this issue, a best-effort approach is used to perform
indentation around syntax errors.  Furthermore, the indentation
strategy can help recover from previously incorrect indentation that
has occurred while the buffer was in a syntactically invalid state.

If none of the existing indentation strategies are sufficient, a
custom strategy can be created and used.  In order to create a
strategy, a new strategy symbol should be specified in
@code{ada-ts-mode-indent-strategy}, and an implementation of
@code{ada-ts-mode-indent} should be created, specializing on the new strategy
symbol name.  Refer to existing instances of this function to
understand how current strategy functions are implemented.

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-fill-reindent-defun
Applies formatting to the comment at point or the defun (i.e.,
subprogram, package, task, etc.) containing point.  For a comment,
the comment is refilled according to @code{fill-paragraph}.  When a prefix
argument is supplied, the filled paragraph is justified.  Otherwise,
the defun containing point is re-indented using the configured
indentation back-end.
@end deffn

@menu
* Ada Language Server Indentation::
@end menu

@node Ada Language Server Indentation
@section Ada Language Server Indentation

Since the Ada Language Server provides code formatting, not just an
indentation engine, it may be necessary to configure the settings of
the code formatter to meet behavioral desires.  Under the hood, the
Ada LS may use either @samp{GNATformat} or @samp{GNATpp} (pretty print) although the
later appears to be deprecated.  @samp{GNATformat} is an opinionated
formatter with only a few configuration options, while @samp{GNATpp} contains
many more options for the user to configure.  Configuration for either
formatter occurs in the GNAT Project file in their corresponding
packages (i.e., @samp{Format} and @samp{Pretty_Print}, respectively).  The Ada LS
will read the settings from the project file to control formatting.
The specific formatter to use is configured through the Ada LS
@samp{useGnatformat} setting.  See the Ada Language Server documentation for
details about this setting and its default value.

When using the @samp{GNATpp} engine to format a line or region of the buffer,
for minimal impact to the buffer, it's likely desirable to use the
@samp{--source-line-breaks} switch to prevent @samp{GNATpp} from reformatting the
buffer beyond indentation.  With the @samp{GNATformat} engine, there is no
control over the formatting, as it is opinionated.  Refer to their
respective documentation for the full set of options available for the
formatting engines.

The value of @code{ada-ts-mode-indent-offset} is provided to the Ada Language
Server as the @samp{tabSize} parameter in the @samp{textDocument/rangeFormatting}
request.  This corresponds to the main indentation amount (i.e.,
overriding the @samp{--indentation} switch for @samp{GNATpp} or the @samp{Indentation}
package setting for @samp{GNATformat}).

@node Navigation
@chapter Navigation

The major mode implements the normal source navigation commands which
can be used to move around the buffer (i.e., @samp{C-M-a}, @samp{C-M-e}, etc).  It
should also be noted that @samp{which-function-mode} is also supported and
will show the current package and/or subprogram in the mode line, when
enabled.

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-find-other-file
Locate the corresponding body or specification file related to the
file in the current buffer.  When an LSP client is active, the Ada
Language Server will be commanded to direct navigation to the other
file.  This is the most accurate method as the Language Server will
take into consideration non-standard naming conventions that are
described in the GNAT project file.  When no LSP client is active,
@code{ff-find-other-file} will be used to find the corresponding file.
@end deffn

@defopt ada-ts-mode-other-file-alist
File extension mapping used to direct @code{ff-find-other-file} to find the
corresponding file.  This customization is used to define the buffer
local @code{ff-find-other-file-alist}.
@end defopt

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-find-project-file
Locate the GNAT project file related to the source file of the
current buffer.  When an LSP client is active, the Ada Language
Server will be queried for the project file, otherwise Alire will be
queried if an @samp{alire.toml} file exists in the directory hierarchy and
the Alire executable is found in the path.  If neither of these two
conditions occur, a single project file will be searched for in the
root directory of the project if one exists.  Finally, if the
project file still is not found, a search will look for a @samp{defaut.gpr}
file somewhere in the directory hierarchy from the current buffer
file's directory.
@end deffn

@defopt ada-ts-mode-alire-program
The name of the Alire executable program that will be searched for
on the path, and if found, may be invoked for certain @code{ada-ts-mode}
commands (such as to query for the name and location of the GNAT
project file).
@end defopt

@node Imenu
@chapter Imenu

With the provided Imenu support, additional options are available for
ease of navigation within an Ada source file.  Imenu supports indexing
of declarations, bodies and stubs for packages, subprograms, task
units and protected units as well as type declarations and with
clauses.

@defopt ada-ts-mode-imenu-categories
The set of categories to be used for Imenu.  Since there are a
number of different categories supported, it may be a distraction to
display categories that aren't desired.  Therefore, the set of
categories can be customized to reduce clutter or to increase
performance.  The order in which the categories are listed will be
respected when the Imenu indexing is performed.  This is helpful if
specific ordering of categories is desired.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-imenu-category-name-alist
The mapping between categories and the displayed name for the
category.  This customization may be helpful if you are expecting a
specific name for a category, use plural instead of singular nouns,
or want to customize for internationalization.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-imenu-nesting-strategy-function
Function to use for constructing nested items within the Imenu data
structure.  The specific nesting function the user should use will
depend on which user interface is used to consume Imenu data, as
different interfaces behave differently with respect to how they
handle nested items.  Some interfaces will display both an entry for
the item as well as an entry for items nested within that item.  In
that case, using ``Place Before Nested Entries'' is a good choice.
Other user interfaces remove duplicate entries, so using ``Place
Within Nested Entries'' will create a placeholder entry in the list
of sub-items.  If none of these are satisfactory, a custom function
can be used to implement a different strategy.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-imenu-nesting-strategy-placeholder
Placeholder to use for the ``Place Within Nested Entries'' strategy.
This placeholder could also be used with a custom function if it
supports a placeholder.  If this option is customized, it should be
configured such that it doesn't interfere with other valid item
names.  Therefore, it is suggested to choose a placeholder which is
not a valid item name.  For example, surrounding a string with
parenthesis or brackets.
@end defopt

@defopt ada-ts-mode-imenu-sort-function
The items in each Imenu category can be sorted for each nesting
level.  The current options are to use ``In Buffer Order'' which will
list the items as they appear in the buffer, or to sort the items
``Alphabetically''.  Optionally, a custom sort function can be used if
neither of these are suitable.  A custom sort function should be
aware of the possible existence of a placeholder and to order that
before any ``sorted'' items in order to put the placeholder at the top
of the list.
@end defopt

@node Casing
@chapter Casing

Functionality is provided to manage casing within an Ada buffer.  This
includes a number of commands to apply casing rules to point, to a
region or to the entire buffer.  The commands can be used
interactively, but may also be useful in other ways (such as calling
the buffer casing command from the @samp{buffer-save-hook}).  An auto-casing
minor mode is also provided which performs case formatting as you
type.

@defopt ada-ts-mode-case-formatting
A set of casing rules, used by the casing commands and modes, which
apply category specific formatting and dictionaries.
@end defopt

@deffn Command ada-ts-auto-case-mode
A minor mode which applies casing corrections as you type at each
word or subword boundary.
@end deffn

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-case-format-region
Applies formatting to the specified region for all items in the
region which match the case formatting categories specified in
@samp{ada-ts-mode-case-formatting}.  When the region doesn't start or stop
exactly on a category boundary, the range is expanded to the
category boundary.
@end deffn

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-case-format-at-point
Applies formatting to point, assuming the item at point matches a
case formatting category specified in @samp{ada-ts-mode-case-formatting}.
When no category is matched, no formatting is applied.
@end deffn

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-case-format-buffer
Applies formatting to the entire buffer for all items in the buffer
which match the case formatting categories specified in
@samp{ada-ts-mode-case-formatting}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-case-format-dwim
A convenience command which will select between ``region'' and ``at
point'' formatting depending on whether a region is active in the
buffer.
@end deffn

If none of the existing casing categories are sufficient, or an
additional category is desired, a custom category can be created and
used.  In order to create a category, a new category symbol should be
added to @samp{ada-ts-mode-case-formatting} along with the corresponding
formatter and optional dictionary properties.  Additionally, an
implementation of @samp{ada-ts-mode-case-category-p} should be created,
specializing on the new category symbol name.  Refer to existing
instances of this predicate function to understand how current
category functions are implemented.

@node Ada Language Server
@chapter Ada Language Server

Functionality provided by the Ada Language Server is seamlessly
integrated into the corresponding functional areas as appropriate
(i.e., indentation, cross-references, etc.).  However, there is other
support @samp{ada-ts-mode} provides which is specific to managing the Ada
Language Server itself, not the functionality it provides.

@deffn Command ada-ts-als-find-user-config-file
Find Ada Language Server user configuration file.  If the variable
@code{$XDG_CONFIG_HOME} exists, the user configuration file is
@code{$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/als/config.json}.  Otherwise, the user configuration
file is @code{~/.config/als/config.json}.  If the file does not exist, a
new file will be visited.
@end deffn

@deffn Command ada-ts-als-find-workspace-config-file
Find Ada Language Server workspace configuration file.  The file is
found in the root of the LSP client defined workspace root
directory, when an LSP client is active, otherwise the file is found
relative to the project root as determined by project.el.  If the
file does not exist, a new file will be visited.
@end deffn

@deffn Command ada-ts-als-show-composite-config
Show the composite JSON-formatted configuration for the Ada Language
Server combining the user configuration file (when exists), the
workspace configuration file (when exists) and the LSP client
specific configuration (when an LSP client is active).  This
provides a holistic view of the separate parts that comprise the
configuration, which can be helpful when troubleshooting
configuration problems.  Overlapping configuration from these
sources are combined based on priority, such that the LSP client
configuration is higher priority than the workspace configuration,
which is higher priority than the user configuration.  This is
consistent with how the Language Server resolves overlapping
configuration.  Note that the Ada Language Server has a default
configuration, when not specified by any of these sources.  Refer to
the Ada Language Server documentation for full details.
@end deffn

@node Miscellaneous
@chapter Miscellaneous

This section covers miscellaneous mode-specific commands and user
options which don't fit elsewhere.

@defopt ada-ts-mode-keymap-prefix
Prefix key used to activate the mode's keymap.  This can be
configured as desired to change the prefix while still preserving
the rest of the mode map.  If the keymap prefix is set to nil, then
the mode commands won't be mapped at all.
@end defopt

@deffn Command ada-ts-mode-defun-comment-box
Creates a comment box above the defun enclosing point.  A comment
box is typically used to visually identify the start of a
subprogram.  Not only can this command be used in subprograms, but
it can be used within anything considered a defun, which includes
declarations, bodies, body stubs, generic instantiations and
renaming declarations for packages, task units, protected units,
subprograms, etc.  The comment box will be indented to the same
level as the enclosing defun.  The following demonstrates the look
of a defun comment box for a subprogram body.

@example
-----------------
-- Hello_World --
-----------------

procedure Hello_World is
begin
   Put_Line ("Hello, world!");
end Hello_World;
@end example
@end deffn

@node LSP Client Support
@chapter LSP Client Support

In order to integrate functionality provided by the Ada Language
Server (such as indentation), @code{ada-ts-mode} must interact with an active
LSP client.  Since multiple LSP clients exist, this interaction must
be configurable such that additional LSP clients can be added when
needed.  Additionally, @code{ada-ts-mode} must be able to determine which LSP
client is active in the buffer.  If there is no active LSP client in
the buffer, @code{ada-ts-mode} will not be able to make use of LSP provided
capabilities and thus falls back on providing this capability without
it's support, which likely will be less precise.

It's up to the user to configure the LSP client to be active in an
@code{ada-ts-mode} buffer, typically through the use of the @code{ada-ts-mode-hook}
to enable the LSP client minor mode, although those clients which
utilize directory local variables for configuration (e.g., GPR project
filename), may need to hook into the @code{hack-local-variables-hook} in
order to initialize after the directory local variables have been
initialized.  Refer to the documentation for the specific LSP client
used for details.

A generic interface is used to support different LSP clients.  This
interface is described in @samp{ada-ts-mode-lspclient.el}.  There are
separate files for each supported LSP client which implement those
interfaces.  These separate files are configured to automatically load
when both @code{ada-ts-mode} and the corresponding LSP client package have
been loaded.

To add an unsupported LSP client, add client-specific methods for all
of the interfaces described in @samp{ada-ts-mode-lspclient.el}.  In addition,
a parameterless function for that client should be added to the
@code{ada-ts-mode-lspclient-find-functions} hook variable (via @code{add-hook}).
That function, when invoked, should determine if the LSP client is
active in the current buffer, and when active, return an LSP client
instance (which can be used to dispatch on the client-specific
methods), else return @code{nil}.

@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting

@menu
* Org Mode Source Code Blocks::
* Function Calls not Highlighted Correctly::
@end menu

@node Org Mode Source Code Blocks
@section Org Mode Source Code Blocks

When Org Mode doesn't know the major mode for the language of a source
block, it will guess by appending ``-mode'' to the end of the language
name.  If we use a language name of ``ada'', this means it will look for
a major mode named ``ada-mode''.  This default behavior doesn't work if
we want to use Tree-Sitter enabled modes.  Maybe in the future it will
be aware of these modes, but in the meantime, we can explicitly
configure Org Mode to map to the Tree-Sitter major mode using the
customization variable @samp{org-src-lang-modes}.

The following can be added to your configuration to persist the
setting:

@lisp
(with-eval-after-load 'org-src
  (add-to-list 'org-src-lang-modes '("ada" . ada-ts)))
@end lisp

@node Function Calls not Highlighted Correctly
@section Function Calls not Highlighted Correctly

If you observe places in the syntax highlighting where functions calls
are not being properly highlighted, such as an array being highlighted
as a function call, or a parameterless function call not being
highlighted, this is due to ambiguities in the syntax.  From a pure
syntax perspective, array accesses look the same as function calls.
Also parameterless function calls look the same as variable accesses.
In places where it can be determined from the syntax (such as a
generic package instantiation) care is taken to avoid highlighting
these places as function calls.  In other places, it cannot be known
from the syntax tree alone and that is where the syntax highlighting
will become inaccurate.

One way to address this slightly inaccurate syntax highlighting of
function calls, is simply to disable it.  An easy way to perform this
is through the use of the @samp{treesit-font-lock-recompute-features}
function.  Using this function when loading the major mode will allow
you to customize which features are enabled/disabled from the default
settings.

@lisp
(defun ada-ts-mode-setup ()
  (treesit-font-lock-recompute-features nil '(function)))

(add-hook 'ada-ts-mode-hook #'ada-ts-mode-setup)
@end lisp

If disabling function call highlighting is not sufficiently
satisfying, another approach is to augment the syntax highlighting of
@samp{ada-ts-mode} with that of the Ada language server.  The language server
is capable of providing semantic highlighting, which is what is needed
in this situation.  Refer to the Ada language server and a
corresponding Emacs Language Server Protocol (LSP) client.  Not all
LSP clients for Emacs support semantic highlighting, so investigate
first before selecting one.  When semantic highlighting is used with
@samp{ada-ts-mode}, inaccurate function call highlighting will be corrected.
This includes both places where function calls are being highlighted,
which aren't real function calls, as well as places which are function
calls but are not being highlighted.  In addition to function call
highlighting, semantic highlighting provides highlighting of other
semantic information, therefore it is highly recommended.

If you do observe places where function call syntax highlighting is
inaccurate and it can be determined from the syntax tree, this is
considered a bug and should be reported by filing an issue against the
package.

@node Example Configuration
@chapter Example Configuration

The following is an example configuration using @samp{use-package} to manage
this configuration.  It assumes that @samp{package.el} is your package
manager.  This checks to make sure tree-sitter support is enabled in
Emacs before attempting to install/configure the package, thus your
configuration will remain compatible with versions of Emacs which
don't yet support tree-sitter, and will not install and configure this
package in its absence.  This also demonstrates how to configure
external indentation support through the Ada Language Server (assuming
the user has configured an LSP client to be active in the buffer), if
that is preferred over the intrinsic indentation support.

@lisp
(when (and (fboundp 'treesit-available-p)
           (treesit-available-p))
  (use-package ada-ts-mode
    :ensure t
    :defer t ; autoload updates `auto-mode-alist'
    :custom (ada-ts-mode-indent-backend 'lsp) ; Use Ada LS indentation
    :init
    ;; Configure source blocks for Org Mode.
    (with-eval-after-load 'org-src
      (add-to-list 'org-src-lang-modes '("ada" . ada-ts)))
    ;; Enable auto-casing
    :hook (ada-ts-mode . ada-ts-auto-case-mode)))

;; Configure Imenu

(use-package imenu
  :ensure nil ; built-in
  :custom (imenu-auto-rescan t)
  :hook (ada-ts-mode . imenu-add-menubar-index))
@end lisp

@node Resources
@chapter Resources

@itemize
@item
Recommended packages:
@itemize
@item
@uref{https://github.com/brownts/gpr-ts-mode, gpr-ts-mode}: Tree-sitter based GNAT Project Major Mode
@end itemize
@item
Extended example configuration:
@itemize
@item
@uref{https://github.com/brownts/dotemacs-ada, dotemacs-ada}: Emacs configuration for Ada & GNAT Project
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Command & Function Index
@appendix Command & Function Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@appendix Variable Index

@printindex vr

@bye
